[move][changelog] Named addresses (#8777)
diem/diem: language/changes/5-named-addresses.md

# Named Addresses

- Status: Implemented in Move 1.3

## Introduction

Named addresses are a new source language only feature (that is, the named address feature is
compiled away and not present in the Move bytecode format). The feature allows names to be used in
place of numerical values in any spot where addresses are used. Named addresses are declared as top
level elements (outside of modules and scripts) with `address MyAddr;` and can be assigned like so
`address MyAddr = 0x42;`

With the landing of this feature, Move standard library modules now reside under the address `Std`

> and must be used as such, e.g. `Std::Vector`. Similarly, diem framework modules now reside under the

Reviewer: I think the "must be used as such" behavior is worth explaining above, perhaps a clarification that this is doing something stronger than creating an alias between 0x42 and `MyAddr` would be enough.

Reviewer: Also, nit: diem framework -> Diem Framework

Author: Added a bit more on this, since it is a breaking change of sorts

address `DiemFramework`, e.g. `DiemFramework::XUS`.

Alongside this change, there is new syntax for address literals when used as expression values, e.g.
`let addr = @0x42;`.

## Motivations

Fixed, numerical addresses were "good enough" for the language starting off. But the inability to
set addresses via a config at build time will severely hinder code portability and usability long
term. Additionally, the lack of named address support has been painful both for account
configuration in testing and basic readability of code.

> To combat this, named addresses can be added as a source language feature. They will still compile

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To combat this, we added named addresses. They compile
```

+ eliminating future tense below.

down to the same address system that exists today, but it will greatly increase the portability,
testability, and readability of source language programs.

## Description

### New Address Literal Syntax

Addresses now come in two flavors, named or numerical. The syntax for a named address follows the
same rules for any named identifier in Move. The syntax of a numerical address is no longer
restricted to `0x`-prefixed values, and now any valid numerical literal can be used.

To make room for the named address feature, address expression values have a new syntax. This new
syntax reduces the complexity around named addresses as it prevents shadowing issues around module
members (specifically constants) and local variables.

In the old syntax, all address values began with `0x` and this hex prefix could not be used for
integer values. In the new syntax, all address values are prefixed with `@`. Following the `@`
operator any valid address can be used. For example:

```move
let _: u8 = 0x1u8;
let _: u64 = 0x42u64;
let _: u128 = 0x42u128;
let a1: address = @Std;
let a2: address = @66;
let a3: address = @0x42;
```

> In a way, you can think of `@` as an operator that takes an address from being a namespace item to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can think of `@` as an operator that takes an address from being a namespace item to
```

an expression item.

### Declaring Named Addresses

In this new system, anywhere numerical address literals are used, a name can be used instead. New
address names can be declared as:

```move
address MyAddr;
```

> Using an address block will also declare the name:

Reviewer: Kind of unrelated, but: is there still a plan to deprecate address blocks?

Author: Maybe? They might still be useful

```move
address MyAddr {
module M {
    ...
}
}
```

However, using the `address::module` syntax will not declare the name. It must be declared before
used:

```move
address MyAddr;
module MyAddr::M {
    ...
}
```

The declared address can then be used in both module access and or as expression values (with the
new `@` syntax)

```move
script {
    fun example() {
        MyAddr::M::foo(@MyAddr);
    }
}
```

> An address can be declared any number of times throughout a program.

Reviewer: This is less about documentation, but wondering why is this allowed? IIUC, the code would still compile if you removed either declaration. That doesn't bother me, but I am a bit afraid that allowing this might allow you to get conflicting declarations without noticing it if two different packages declare the same address name (e.g., `Utils`). 

Maybe that's not actually a problem, but I can't fully convince myself--e.g., maybe the "same address" rule for `friend` means that an attacker package could get unauthorized `friend` access for a module `Utils::M` in a different package by also declaring the name `Utils` in the attacker package.

Author: This is more of just a code/language simplicity thing, and really nice for tooling. Consider the interface generator, it doesn't know about other files or the rest of the system. It will just declare all of the addresses it needs to for that module. The multiple declarations (as long as they all agree) really simplifies that.

For packages, we will likely do something completely different more or less remove the addresses from the source syntax eventually.

Reviewer: > For packages, we will likely do something completely different more or less remove the addresses from the source syntax eventually.

Gotcha, I'm less worried about it if this is the eventual plan. But maybe worth thinking more about the "supply chain address name conflict" attacks if not.

address MyAddr {
module N {
    ...
}
}
```

### Assigning Named Addresses

The address can be assigned a value with `= <number value>`:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xC0FFEE;
```

Or in an address block

```move
address MyAddr = 0xC0FFEE {
module M {
   ...
}
}
```

The address cannot be assigned using the `address::module` syntax. It must be assigned elsewhere:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xCOFFEE;
module MyAddr::M {
    ...
}
```

An address can be assigned any number of times in a program, but it can only be given _one_ value.
The following would be fine, since the address `MyAddr` is given the same value in both assignmets:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xC0FFEE;
address MyAddr = 12648430; // decimal representation of 0xC0FFEE
```

Assigning a two different values will result in an error:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xCOFFEE;
address MyAddr = 0xDEADBEEF; // ERROR!
```

### Opaqueness

These assignments, and the name system as whole, only exist at the source language level. Names will
be fully substituted for their value at the byte code level. So the example from before would be
equivalent to

```move
script {
    fun example() {
        0xC0FFEE::M::foo(@0xC0FFEE);
    }
}
```

> But at the source language level, the two are not interchangeable. If we had the declaration:

Reviewer: Alluded to this in my question in the intro, but I think this point is perhaps surprising and should be made as early as possible.

# Named Addresses

- Status: Implemented in Move 1.3

## Introduction

Named addresses are a new source language only feature (that is, the named address feature is
compiled away and not present in the Move bytecode format). The feature allows names to be used in
place of numerical values in any spot where addresses are used. Named addresses are declared as top

> level elements (outside of modules and scripts) with `address MyAddr;` and can be assigned like so

Reviewer 2: Ah, I see that @sblackshear suggested mentioning opaqueness in the intro. I'm still not sure I agree, though.

> level elements (outside of modules and scripts) with `address MyAddr;` and can be assigned like so

Reviewer 2: OK, so I'm coming around to this. It is nice to have a summary of the main changes at the beginning of the document. I would probably drop the examples of specific syntax, though. Another option would be to put this summary at the beginning of the Description section -- I think I would prefer that but can live with it either way.

> level elements (outside of modules and scripts) with `address MyAddr;` and can be assigned like so

Author: I'll leave a few of the syntax example bits, but cut them from the opaque section. I think it is important to get some of the syntax as soon as possible. I think it really reduces the amount of digging a reader has to do. 
Not having syntax right away is a bit of a pet peeve of mine when reading language docs :)

accessing standard library or Diem Framework modules must be updated to use named addresses.

Alongside this change, there is new syntax for address literals when used as expression values, e.g.
`let addr = @0x42;`.

## Motivations

Fixed, numerical addresses were "good enough" for the language starting off. But the inability to
set addresses via a config at build time will severely hinder code portability and usability long
term. Additionally, the lack of named address support has been painful both for account
configuration in testing and basic readability of code.

To combat this, we added named addresses. They compile down to the same address system that exists
today, but it will greatly increase the portability, testability, and readability of source language
programs.

## Description

### New Address Literal Syntax

Addresses now come in two flavors, named or numerical. The syntax for a named address follows the
same rules for any named identifier in Move. The syntax of a numerical address is no longer
restricted to `0x`-prefixed values, and now any valid numerical literal can be used.

> To make room for the named address feature, address expression values have a new syntax. This new

Author: Maybe... I'm trying to indicate that it is just a change for expressions not for the name space side of things. I would consider both cases to be "address literals" hence the weird wordplay here. 
Any thoughts on how to make that more clear?

> To make room for the named address feature, address expression values have a new syntax. This new

Author: I think my issue here is just nailing down terminology, specifically for named addresses. A much bigger issue for docs than the changelog, but happy to make any changes to this even though it has landed

syntax reduces the complexity around named addresses as it prevents shadowing issues around module
members (specifically constants) and local variables.

In the old syntax, all address values began with `0x` and this hex prefix could not be used for
integer values. In the new syntax, all address values are prefixed with `@`. Following the `@`
operator any valid address can be used. For example:

```move
let _: u8 = 0x1u8;
let _: u64 = 0x42u64;
let _: u128 = 0x42u128;
let a1: address = @Std;
let a2: address = @66;
let a3: address = @0x42;
```

You can think of `@` as an operator that takes an address from being a namespace item to an
expression item.

### Declaring Named Addresses

> In this new system, anywhere numerical address literals are used, a name can be used instead. New

Author: just going to cut it, the sentence is likely a relic from the github issue text

```

Or in an address block

```move
address MyAddr = 0xC0FFEE {
module M {
   ...
}
}
```

The address cannot be assigned using the `address::module` syntax. It must be assigned elsewhere:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xCOFFEE;
module MyAddr::M {
    ...
}
```

An address can be assigned any number of times in a program, but it can only be given _one_ value.
The following would be fine, since the address `MyAddr` is given the same value in both assignmets:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xC0FFEE;
address MyAddr = 12648430; // decimal representation of 0xC0FFEE
```

Assigning a two different values will result in an error:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xCOFFEE;
address MyAddr = 0xDEADBEEF; // ERROR!
```

### Opaqueness

These assignments, and the name system as whole, only exist at the source language level. Names will
be fully substituted for their value at the byte code level. So the example from before would be
equivalent to

```move
script {
    fun example() {
        0xC0FFEE::M::foo(@0xC0FFEE);
    }
}
```

But at the source language level, the two are not interchangeable. If we had the declaration:

```move
address MyAddr = 0xCOFFEE;
module MyAddr::M {
    public fun bar() {}
}
```

> The function `M::bar` _must_ be used accessed through the `MyAddr` named address, not through the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The function `M::bar` _must_ be accessed through the `MyAddr` named address, not through the
```

numerical value.

For example:

```move
script {
    fun example() {
        // ERROR! 0xC0FFEE::M::bar();
        MyAddr::M::bar()
    }
}
```

> ## Move Stdlib and Diem Framework Modules

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Move Standard Library and Diem Framework Modules
```

As mentioned above, all standard library modules now live in `Std` and all Diem Framework modules
live in `DiemFramework`. The `DiemFramework` address is set to `0x1` and this hard-coded assignment

> will be fine. However, our hope is to allow for `Std` to be assigned to different numerical values

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
will be fine. However, our hope is to allow `Std` to be assigned different numerical values
```

depending on the deployment of those modules. For now, `Std` has a hardcoded assignment of `0x1`.
See the 'Future Work' section below for details about how this might work in the future.

## Backwards Compatibility

Since, all standard library modules and all Diem Framework modules live in `Std` and `DiemFramework`
respectively, source code must be updated to use those named addresses. The named addresses are

> opaque, so the numeric values can no longer be used to access the modules. For example, any usages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
opaque, so the numeric values can no longer be used to access the modules. For example, any use
```
